Well spring has well and truly sprung
And things are bursting out with color
and new growth all over the place. But
along with the good weather comes
unfortunately sometimes cold nights
that might get to beneath freezing point
and that can damage the soft, young growth and fleshy flowers on some plants that
are
early flowering like my Star Magnolia
here
which unfortunately was damaged in a
frost that we had last night
The big fleshy flowers unfortunately
are vulnerable when the temperatures dip
beneath freezing point.
But, if you're in a situation like me
where you're having some damage
what can you do to prevent it? Well, we could
do like the commercial growers
and spray water over the plants,
particularly
if there's a lot of plants concentrated in
one area
Hook up all holes and spray water over
it
you see when water is sprayed and
it releases latent heat and not often
enough to prevent
damage. Well, if you just have a few
isolated small plants like
this hydrangea here with soft young
growth on it, you can employ the old
method of putting some form of protection
over the top with it. Just gather the
branches and
cover it up for the night, and that will
do the trick.
It's not too pretty but at least it will
prevent the damage during the night
But when you have taller plants like
this Japanese maple here
that's got a lot of soft, young growth
you're going to have to employ other
methods. Now that would mean putting
some sort of insulation material
over the top for the plants, draping it
over. In the old days we used to use
sheets
perhaps even blankets, though they tend
to be a bit heavy
I sometimes use the fabric that I
use in the garden for collecting up trimmings and
weeds and so on. And plastic
is better than nothing, but honestly
plastic isn't that great, because it
tends to collect humidity
in underneath and the temperature under
plastic can sometimes actually be colder
then it is out in the open air. But, for
me
the best material is this fleecy
frost blanket...... this is great stuff
its light and airy, so it floats
over the top so the plants. It has great
insulation properties, and yet it
breaths, so it doesn't collect
moisture underneath. And best of all, it
allows light to pass through
so that if you have to leave it on your
plant for
a day or two, it's not the end of the
world, it won't matter.
But whenever all frost passes, you can
take it off
and you'll be able to enjoy your plants.
And very easy to put on
just cut into strips, tie it
onto the plant or you could use cotton
twine. Perhaps weigh it down here on the
bottom
with a rock, something that will help to
keep it in place
And you'll be able to enjoy your
magnolias
your Japanese maples or whatever it is
that you have to protect
very easily with minimal cost
Well that's all very well, but what do
you do when you have a Magnolia like
this one
that's twenty five, thirty foot in the
air?  That's full of gorgeous blooms
and you can get up to the top of the
plant! Well, you might have to employ a boy a
cherry picker
or else to like the citrus growers and
put some heat underneath it.
Just enough to raise the temperature to
prevent the damage
And remember, if all else fails
and you haven't been able to get out to
protect your plants
you can always go out, and cut them, and bring them indoors. Put them in a vase
like these ones
so that you're able to enjoy them
indoors, whether it freezes outside or
not
Now there's lots more information on our
website
Gardensplendor.com. Enjoy your
gardening
It's good for us and it's very good for
our environment too.